Earth is the third planet from the Sun and the only object in the Universe
known to harbor life. According to radiometric dating and other sources of
evidence, Earth formed over 4 billion years ago. Earth's gravity interacts
with other objects in space, especially the Sun and the Moon, Earth's only
natural satellite. Earth revolves around the Sun in 365.26 days, a period
known as an Earth year. During this time, Earth rotates about its axis
about 366.26 times.

Earth's axis of rotation is tilted, producing seasonal variations on the
planet's surface. The gravitational interaction between the Earth and Moon
causes ocean tides, stabilizes the Earth's orientation on its axis, and
gradually slows its rotation. Earth is the densest planet in the Solar
System and the largest of the four terrestrial planets.

Earth's lithosphere is divided into several rigid tectonic plates that
migrate across the surface over periods of many millions of years. About
71% of Earth's surface is covered with water, mostly by oceans. The
remaining 29% is land consisting of continents and islands that together
have many lakes, rivers and other sources of water that contribute to the
hydrosphere. The majority of Earth's polar regions are covered in ice,
including the Antarctic ice sheet and the sea ice of the Arctic ice pack.
Earth's interior remains active with a solid iron inner core, a liquid
outer core that generates the Earth's magnetic field, and a convecting
mantle that drives plate tectonics.

Within the first billion years of Earth's history, life appeared in the
oceans and began to affect the Earth's atmosphere and surface, leading to
the proliferation of aerobic and anaerobic organisms. Some geological
evidence indicates that life may have arisen as much as 4.1 billion years
ago. Since then, the combination of Earth's distance from the Sun, physical
properties, and geological history have allowed life to evolve and thrive.
In the history of the Earth, biodiversity has gone through long periods of
expansion, occasionally punctuated by mass extinction events. Over 99% of
all species that ever lived on Earth are extinct. Estimates of the number
of species on Earth today vary widely; most species have not been
described. Over 7.6 billion humans live on Earth and depend on its
biosphere and natural resources for their survival. Humans have developed
diverse societies and cultures; politically, the world has about 200
sovereign states.
